feature of blender that is often overlooked in the context of shading our drivers.
Drivers are a powerful tool to set up
dynamic interactions between properties of several kinds.
Going from simply remote controlling parameters in a custom interface all the
way to setting up complex dependencies
between multiple objects and scene parameters.
A driver is essentially a tool to link the value of one property to something else
that could just be another property or a
combination of multiple other properties and inputs.
Any value input field in blender that can be
animated can also be assigned with a driver.
A value field with a driver can easily be identified by its color turning violet
similar to the coloration of values that are animated with key frames.
The value of a driven input is completely overridden by that driver,
so the value cannot be changed manually anymore.
As an example here I simply linked the hawaii component
of the location of this cube to the X.
Component.
And if I now shift the cube along the X axis,
you can see that the Y component exactly mirrors the values of the X component
so it shifts the same distance on the y axis as well.
And shifting the cube along the Y axis manually is not possible at all anymore.
Of course you can simply delete a driver by right clicking and pressing delete.
Then the value just stays at what it was and is manually adjustable again
because you can only use drivers to control single parameters
individually and not whole maps of values like textures,
Their use in the shading context is still limited to a certain degree,
but they are definitely an important addition to your tool set
and if you know your way a bit around blenders, python,
api drivers even open up a whole new world of hidden possibilities.
Drivers perfectly extend the concepts of procedural
shading that I've shown in the previous chapters
with the ability to connect different parts
of blender to create interactive shading setups.
If you just want to use a driver to control one parameter in your scene with another,
you can simply use the copy as new driver function by
right clicking on the parameter that you want to link to
and then pasting the driver in the place that you want to be driven.
That is incredibly useful.
For example, to control multiple parameter is at the same time,
especially when they are not accessible in the same place.
Another great use case is to create custom properties
in an object to control parameters of for example,
the shader or the modifier stack directly from within the view port.
But if you want to set up more complex relations with drivers,
you have to edit them either directly by
clicking edit driver or in the driver editor,
the interface for the driver properties looks like this.
You can select different operation types for the driver.
These are all based on the driver's variables that you can define
several of down here and link to multiple other parameters as inputs.
These variables can link to any property in the file to make
it accessible to the driver variables have a type as well.
And you can select between directly linking a specific property
or hooking them up to the transformation of other objects.
That way, you can either directly grab the location,
rotation or scale of an object to drive another
value or the distance or angle between two objects.
If you select single property is the variable type.
You can directly reference any specific property of
a data block within the blend file.
First you have to specify the type of data block that you want to access.
That can be anything from an object, a material, a mesh to an image,
a seen a workspace, you name it.
You see the list of all the different types of data blocks in the drop down menu.
Then you can select the specific prop that you want to reference
from the list of data blocks of the selected type.
And lastly you have to specify the exact path of a property that you
want to reference when you use the copy as a new driver function.
This part is done for you automatically but if
you want to access something very specific here,
some knowledge of the python, api of blender is useful.
You can also look at the path online in the documentation
or use the copy data path feature.
What is important here is to realize that the data path that you specify
is appended to the path of the data block. You can see what path it belongs to.
Up here in the properties tab.
So for example, this way I can link the properties of a modifier,
like the random visibility of this rain modifier,
I can see at the top of the panel that the modifiers are part of the object properties.
So I select the cube object as the linked data block.
If you have python tool tips enabled in the interface preferences,
you can see the full path as well.
But the only thing we need to specify now is the last part after the object.
And if I then just copy the data path of
the property and paste it into the path text field.
It simply gives me the selected property in this case that is
a value switching between zero and one depending on the modifiers,
render visibility
and of course this works the same way for the other properties of the modifiers.
And also it works the same way for other types of properties
you only have to keep in mind what path it is relative to
just as a heads up.
Sometimes when you change the dependency of a driver to another property,
you have to press update dependencies for the driver to work.
If the link somehow does not work, the text field will be marked as read,
let's also take a look at the driver editor in general,
you can open it by right clicking at a driver
and pressing open and driver editor but also it is just
a window like anything else in blender and you can directly
selected from the drop down menu and the driver editor,
you can manage all the drivers in your scene, edit their content and their behavior.
I won't go over all the functionality of the driver editor in detail as this
is not the point of this chapter And
personally when working with drivers for shading,
I usually don't find myself opening the driver editor a lot.
Something that is very useful about the driver editor is to have all drivers in
one place and being able to edit them without using a small pop up window.
Also here you can temporarily disable the effect of
a driver making the value available for manual input.
Again,
the general layout and functionality of the driver editor
is similar to the graph editor for animation.
One very crucial distinction to make though is that what
was shown on the X axis of this graph?
It's not the timeline of the scene and frames
the X axis represents the value of what the driver links.
So in the example of linking the white location of the cube to its X location.
The X axis of the graph represents the actual X component of the cube's location
because that is what the driver references
and the Y component of this curve then gives you the actual
value that the driver will return to the by location by default,
the curve simply returns exactly the input,
which is why the wild location is always
exactly equal to the explication and this example.
But if I change around the curve by adjusting the handles and adding more key frames,
I can control the behavior of how the X location
is converted into the value that the driver returns.
That way I can define a specific path that the cube has to follow.
In this example you can even just like in the graph editor for
animation use f curve modifiers to change the progression of the graph.
But as I mentioned before this aspect of adjusting
drivers is quite specific and not usually necessary.
So let's move on with the main
functionality of the driver properties themselves another and
perhaps even the main operation type of
drivers is using them as scripted expressions.
That means instead of simply defining the driver
as for example the average of the variables
being able to define a specific function using
the variables in a line off python code.
This way you can simply define a custom operation using the drivers variables
that can simply be a mathematical operation using the variables
with the simple arithmetic operations like addition and subtraction etcetera.
But you can also use the basic functions of python and some
additional mathematical functions within the expression like sign or co sign.
For example,
the general python functionality here is useful as you can pass other
types of data through as a variable than just single values.
For example,
when I simply reference the name of an object as a variable,
I can retrieve the length of the name as
the value of the driver using the land operation.
The only restriction to the data type here is that the result has
to be a single value as drivers can only be applied to value fields
to quickly set up a driver as a scripted expression.
You can simply type in a hash symbol in front of
the expression and it will be interpreted as a driver.
That way you can very quickly link a value to you dynamic expression.
You can buy the way use expressions also without creating a driver.
The difference is that then the result is converted into a value
and you can't adjust the expression later on.
But for simple operations that is usually very useful.
Something that I use a lot together with scripted expressions is to refer to
the current frame by simply using the global variable frame within the expression.
You can use this to very easily by simply typing hash frame into any value
field drive a value by the current frame which represents the time in the scene.
The following video is going to be all about
how to use this for procedural animation of shakers.
So here I want to leave it at just mentioning it like that.
The driver expression can also be based on
the variables that you define for the driver.
You can simply refer to them with their sad name in the expression.
Additionally scripted expressions give you access to the general python,
api of blender and thus you can access a lot of
functionality that is otherwise only reserved for add ons and scripts
and with drivers.
The functionality is conveniently linked to the
input of a value and updates automatically
a lot of the time it makes more
sense to actually write your implementation as a script
but it's still very useful to have this option.
This means that with a scripted expression you can do basically whatever
you can come up with using a single line of python code
but on top of that you can even
integrate your own python functions into the driver name
space to call custom functions from within a
driver and achieve all kinds of customer interactions.
That way you can bypass being limited to a single line of python code and
even integrate any external python packages to
evaluate some custom functionality from within a driver
and this is where the opportunities of drivers
get really crazy if they haven't been before.
However,
this course is not about scripting with python so I
will leave it at that for the time being.
If you are interested in learning more
about using python for scripting and blender.
I recommend you to check out the scripting for artists,
tutorial series by blender zone doctors sibling stubble.
Here on the blender cloud.
I will leave a link to it in the description of this video.
So now that we talked about how to use drivers in general,
I want to quickly go over some
applications of including drivers with procedural shaming.
As I mentioned before,
The use of drivers is limited to values as opposed to texture maps but
still they can nicely be used to integrate external information into a shader.
So the simplest use case would be just exposing
the shade of parameters and an external user interface.
As I have shown before.
You can even use parameters like the custom properties to synchronize
the controls of shading parameters with other parameters in the scene.
Like for example the modifiers as another use case
you can actually drive the content of a
shader dynamically with properties from other objects.
This usually only gets useful for rather advanced shading setups but you can
for example use this to control wind direction with an actual empty object
or to control a character's shading features. Wire amateur,
there are infinitely more uses of drivers in the shading context.
I just wanted to give you a selection to show you
some ideas and inspire you to come up with your own interactions